Handling Abusive Customers

A while back I was on a speaking tour and that week there was a mistake on my cell phone bill. I figured no big deal. I'll call customer service and it should be easy for them to fix. So I get the customer service rep on the phone and the guy sounded like a robot saying, there's nothing I can do. So I tried to humanize robot man, and I asked him if anything like this had ever happened to him. He actually said, yes. I said, okay, what did you do? He said, I paid it. I'm thinking this is ridiculous.
 
  And obviously I'm not getting anywhere with this guy. So we hung up. So I'm getting ready to head out of my hotel to a restaurant for dinner, and the phone rings. It's an 800 number. And this time I get yet another customer service rep, John, from the phone company, but he was different. I explained my problem to him, and he said, I know how frustrating that can be. It's happened to me before, too. I'm here now and I promise I will get this resolved for you ASAP. I kept him on the line until he resolved the problem and issued me a refund.
  
   That is how you reassure your customers and provide the best solution that you can. First, you must take responsibility for whatever problem your customer's having. Even if it's not your fault. This is one of the most challenging strategies for many customer service representatives to embrace. When John took my call, he took responsibility for what I went through with the other two customer service reps. And he reassured me that he would take care of me. When something negative is not your fault, it's human nature to want to blame someone else or shy away from responsibility if something goes wrong. But in order to provide your customers with world-class service, you must take responsibility for the issue in that moment. Why? Because in that moment you represent your company.
   
    Your customer doesn't care who screwed up. They simply want their issue fixed. Don't take anything personally, but apologize and take responsibility. Second, tell your customer that you will do everything you can to ensure they leave happy. When you communicate this to your customer effectively, you will shift their focus in that moment from being upset to leaving happy. And that's where you want to keep their focus, on being happy. John kept my focus on getting my problem resolved and he was working to make that happen. 
    
    Third, reassure the customer that you will work to solve their issue ASAP. Let them know their issue is important, and that you're trying to resolve it quickly. John didn't tell me he had to check with a supervisor or call back later, et cetera. He solved the problem for me right there on the spot. Now, depending on the issue, your industry, your company's policies and procedures, ASAP could mean five minutes, it could mean five weeks or five months. The key is that you start as soon as possible, whether it's sending an email, making a phone call or looking up inventory, When your customer knows you're acting quickly to help them, they generally feel cared for. 
    
    Making sure your customer knows that you're committed to serving them and helping them get a positive solution to their problem will make all the difference in the world. 


Customer Service Specialist Course Notes
Become a customer service specialist by learning skills from LinkedIn Learning. Learn to listen to customer needs and build rapport with those you're helping.

Customer Service: Foundations Notes📝

No matter how hard you try, your customers will always decide how they'll feel about your services. They are unique individuals. 
Think of service from your customers point of view. And each customer has their own unique perspectives. 

The key? Get to know your customer's view of the service they're seeking.
 
Treat everyone like a customer. 

#1 Building Rapport with Customers

By building rapport with customers, you build trust, loyalty, and a measure of forgiveness in your customers. These outcomes sometimes supersedes the quality of services rendered. 

NB: For rapport to have an impact, it must be authentic, from the heart. Not superficial. If the latter is true, the customer would eventually know the employee is just going through the motions. 

Most importantly, be yourself, be unique. Do not imitate others. Be natural. 

One of your favorite way to build rapport should be to initiate a conversation. (The best questions are those that might help you know your customer's needs and preferences.) Follow the 5 questions technique below: 

See the worksheet. 

	• But whenever you ask a question, make sure you are ready to get their answers, care about their answers and seek ways to help no matter the response. 
	• Enhance likability in your customers.
	• Be positive in tone and body language. 
	• Show enthusiasm. Especially useful when under stress, tiredness, hunger etc. 
	• One more helpful tips, create a circle of likability around you wherever you go. These will enhance your customers likability. 

	• Your body language can be seen in your voice. Sit upright, head-ups, and with a smile, say a greeting over the phone. Look straight up as well. 
	• Use a reminder sticky note on your screen to be positive. This affects your approach. 
	• When replying via email, ensure you not just say you're helpful, show it, prove it by providing some helpful tips even though it's not exactly what your customers are requesting, but give alternate help. 


#2 Exceed Your Customer's Expectations

The best way to exceed your customer's expectations is to know/uncover their needs. Look at their needs from their perspectives especially when it involves technical issues. 

Another noteworthy factor for knowing your customer's need is active listening techniques. Developing active listening skills isn't easy. But the steps below can be helpful: 
	1. Face your customer
	2. Make eye contact
	3. Ask questions
	4. Rephrase your own understanding of the customer's request or needs. (See screenshots)

Other precautions to avoid either while on the phone with your customers, or responding to their emails is to:
	i. avoid distractions
	ii. listen and discern unspoken needs. 

Identify customer emotional needs. That's how the customer feel about your services. If they received the wrong or incorrect item or service for example, they'll feel anxiety, frustrations or even anger. The rational need here may be to correct the situation, and deliver the right item even telling the customer to keep the wrong one. But fulfilling their emotional needs will yield the best results. What can be done to make them feel relief, delightful, and happy? Identifying the answer is a key to fulfilling the customers emotional needs. 

Manage Customer Expectations. Customers have expectations when they request for services or items. To manage their expectations would mean looking for/recognizing opportunities to influence what they should expect. What's involved? Make sure to give your customers a good lead time. Take note of worst case scenarios. If a service can be rendered between 3-5 days, then 3 days would be the best case scenario and 5 would be the worst. Whatever the case, it's best to tell the customer something like, up to 5 days, instead of 3 to 5 days because they'll tend to remember the best case scenario of 3 days and fix expectations based on that. 

Another factor is to tell customers the truth. This is important especially when things didn't go as planned, we may be tempted to withhold the truth, but delaying the facts can lead to more problems.

Go the extra mile. To go the extra mile while providing customer services, we need to adopt "the extra mile mindset." Look out for opportunities to go the extra mile, by listening to the customer while they're about to get away. Do they show any sign of fear, anxiety? That may indicate that something more can be done to put them at ease. For example, besides providing directions to a location, or how to use something, add a guideline, or drop off your phone number to receive calls in the event of need. In addition, we can go the extra mile without the customer knowing. In such a case, tactfully point out to the customer the extra service they have been given. In this way, they will feel better, delighted, and recognized. 

#3 Solving Problems

Take ownership of problems. By nature, nobody wants to be blamed for problems or challenges that may arise from whatever situation. Hence, more energy may be directed to focusing on a problem. This may do nothing more than stimulating anger in a customer or even frustration. To take ownership of a problem doesn't mean we are the cause. It could simply mean that we're willing to help, therefore diffusing the problem. In so doing, we redirect energies towards the solution instead of the problems. To take ownership of a problem involves using "the ownership language" instead of "deflected language." 

Ownership language includes sympathizing with the customer, providing directions to a solution or to someone else who can help. Deflecting language includes saying things like, "that's not my job", "that's not in our policy" or even saying "I don't know." By using such language, we are like avoiding the problem, pushing it to the customer. But the former, which is using the ownership language, is best and would yield the best results. 

Acting on customers feedback. To act on customers feedback, we must be able to remove the facts from the rang. This is not always easy, it requires thick skin to see beyond the rang of a customer due to anger or frustration and work with the facts. How can we get reviews? Solicit from the customer, direct face to face feedback. Or get reviews online. Whatever the reviews, analyze the comments and immediately start acting on what's feasible. In this way, customers know that their feedback is not just appreciated but valued. 

Empathize with your customers. Empathizing with your customers isn't same as solving the problem. But it's a way of helping to grease the difficulties while working out the solutions. Hence, while dealing with customers, look out for opportunities to be empathetic and help them to play their own roles in helping out with solutions. 

Expanding your influence. Take cognizant note about what's within the sphere of your control and focus less on what you can't control when dealing with customers needs and issues. Once you identify what can be controlled, take positive actions. When consistently followed through, the customer will feel better at the end compared to when the problems started. 

Prevent Negative Emotions. I like the phrase, "preemptive acknowledgements." It's a way of diffusing customer anger even before it begins. How do you do this? 
	i. Proactively identity possible reasons or cause that may make customer angry.
	ii. Once problems are identified, address problems before they are noticed by the customer.
	iii. Acknowledge the customer feelings. Let the customer sense that you care, that they are being cared for. Show that you care about the problems even though no solution may be in view. When customers senses that you care, that may calm them before their anger boils. 

Diffuse Customer Anger. When customers get or become angry, that can prevent them from being reasonable, and block their clear reasoning. To diffuse such anger calls for emotional intelligence. How can this be done? Use the partner technique. Treat your customers as partners. Identify with their problems. Let them vent their feelings since this will enable them relieve some of the anger. Remember the old saying, "the customer is always right." But that isn't technically true. It simply implies that you shouldn't argue with your customers. Why? Because customers tend to exaggerate their problems. So, be realistic. You can do the following: 
	i. Listen carefully to the customer complaints or vent.
	ii. Acknowledge their feelings even though a solution may not be in sight.
	iii. Refocus on possible solutions to problems. Take note that when a customer has gotten angry, it may take time for them to feel great again. Therefore, help them walk away from the problems first, while figuring out a solution. 

Anchor Your Own Attitude. Anchoring ⚓ your attitude involves stabilizing your own attitude in view of negative feelings arising from maybe your coworkers, boss, or even in dealing with customers. Note that a negative attitude or emotions is contagious. When a coworker has a bad or negative emotions, that can rob off on others. So, how can I anchor my attitude? 

Use two anchor techniques. 
	1. Maintenance anchor: this involves maintaining a positive attitude in view of negativities. These are some aids to maintaining or anchoring a positive attitude. 
		a. Have enough sleep
		b. Exercise
		c. Have a conversation with your coworkers.   
	2. Repair anchor: this involves coming out of negative feelings or emotions. Maybe it could be an angry mood. What can serve as repair anchors? 
		a. Take a walk
		b. Read a book
		c. Visit and enjoy time with family and friends. 

#4 Conclusions

Having a good customer foundation isn't a day's effort. You must continue applying yourself to learning. How do you learn? From applying the suggestions your have learnt. The real life experience in application will provide valuable lessons that can be put to use. Have a customer practice exercise book. Write down the different aspects of customer services that you can improve on. Then, track your progress as you apply your lessons. 

Subscribe to the tips on https://toistersolutions.com/tips. The weekly suggestions or tips are reminders that you can apply to your everyday work activities as you work to exceed your customer's expectations. 


Customer Service: Problem Solving and Troubleshooting

#1 Introduction
There are many what ifs, when dealing with customers. But it's all about the basics, being prepared to deal with the most basic of the situation is the 🔑 key. 
When you're prepared in the most basic way to deal with the challenges of your business, you give proof that you deserve the business, and the business deserves you. 

#2 A Two-step Approach to Common Sense Customer Service for Most Situations 

Validity of Complaints: Firstly, understand why customers complain. There're two basic reasons why customers complain. 
	a. They want somethings for free
	b. They want their issues or concerns to be acknowledged. 

Furthermore,  they want an apology for any one of those. Note that customer service is all about dealing with anyone of those reason. Customer shouldn't complain for a service quality that you did not guarantee. It's all about determining which complaints are valid  and those that are not. For example, when customers complain for a service that isn't advertise but delivered poorly. 

Responding to Valid Complaints: There are 4 key steps that can be used to respond to customer complaints that are valid. 
	i. Apologize and listen. 
	ii. Let customers know how you will handle the situation or problems. They deserve to! That's what shows to them that you took their complaints as valid. For example, making a refund, delivering a service as expected or something else. 
	iii. Schedule a follow up. Let the customer know when you'll provide the next update as per the proffer solutions. 
	iv. Follow up and follow through. What is a plan without a follow up! By following up and through, you can fix the customer concerns and provide relevant feedbacks even before then. 

Responding to Invalid Complaints: In the book,  Evergreen, 4 steps are mentioned.
	i. Treat all invalid complaints as though they are valid. It's because all customer want to be heard and recognized. 
	ii. Redirect and reframe.
	iii. Don't give customer something for free for invalid complaints.


#3 Critical Customer Service Problem-solving Skills

The feel, felt and acknowledge strategy can be very effective in solving customer issues. Empathizing with the customers can go a long way to diffusing a tense situation arising from customers dissatisfaction due to a poor service quality, or delayed service delivery. 

Furthermore, it's a very effective way to apply all the lessons learnt from the course. As a summary, "start, stop, and continue" strategy is a key way to put to practice what have been learnt. "Start" acknowledging, and pacing with your customers. "Stop" over talking and taking over conversations of your customers, and "continue" to reapply these steps as you get feedback from customers reactions. 



Customer Service: Call Control Strategies



Handling an abusive customer in person
 
Selecting transcript lines in this section will navigate to timestamp in the video

- If you work in a business where you have face-to-face contact with your customers, an abusive customer can be extremely difficult to deal with. Let's take a look at a face-to-face encounter. Pay close attention to how the server deals with the abusive customer. Can you identify the steps in this live scenario? (fork clanks) - (snaps fingers) Where is the other half of my salad? - Oh. What seems to be the problem? - It's missing the carrots, the beets, and it tastes like it has the wrong dressing. (plate scrapes) - I see. Absolutely. Let me take this back and get it fixed for you right away. Is there something I can get you in the meantime? - Can you get me back my time that you've wasted? I'm in a hurry. Just the salad. The correct salad would be great. - I'm so sorry for the inconvenience. Here's some fresh bread in the meantime. Should just be another moment, and I'll definitely check to make sure they got it right. Are you visiting or traveling? - I don't eat bread, and look, I'm here to eat, not to talk, so whether I am visiting or traveling, is none of your business. I'm here for a salad. Where is the salad? - You're absolutely right. Your time is important. I'm going to go to the kitchen and check on that salad, and get it out to you right away. I'm going to also check with the manager to see if we can get this meal fully comped. 

Okay, I double checked with the kitchen. Should be perfect this time. Please let me know if there's any other issues. And again, I'm very sorry for the wait. - Ma'am, I'm sorry for the trouble. Your salad's going to be on the house today. - You should be sorry. How hard is your job? I come here all the time, and you guys always mess it up. And I really have no idea why I waste my money and my time here dealing with you morons. - You know, there's really no reason to be disrespectful. I'm going to kindly ask you to leave. I'll go ahead and box this up so you can take it home with you. - Forget about your crappy salad! I am never coming here again. - You can see how intense abusive customer situations can get. Let's see how the server applied the seven steps. When the server started the interaction, he realized the customer was upset and asked, "Oh, what seems to be the problem?" He assessed the situation.

 He reassured and empathized with the customer, by offering to take the salad back to the kitchen and getting the customer something in the meantime. When he came back to the table, he tried to change her focus by asking if she was visiting the area. When that didn't work, the server went back to check on her salad. When he returned with her new salad and his manager, they offered to fully comp her meal. In that moment, he was trying to solve her problem. When the manager realized that the situation was escalating, and the customer's only becoming more abusive to him and his wait staff, he aborted the situation by kindly asking her to leave the restaurant. In this situation, the server does not have a means to follow up with the customer. So it's okay to end the interaction at this point. His safety and the safety of his coworkers is of utmost importance. Dealing with an abusive customer is not easy. But if you follow these steps, more times than not, your customer will calm down and become more reasonable. If not, abort the situation. Try walking through these steps with a colleague or your manager. The more times you practice, the more comfortable you will feel the next time you encounter an abusive customer. I'm David Brownlee, and thank you for the opportunity to be your customer service coach. For more training on customer service, visit me at purecustomerservice.com. And check out my book, "Rockstar Service, Rockstar Profits." 

Handling an abusive customer on the phone

Selecting transcript lines in this section will navigate to timestamp in the video
- Now that we've covered the seven steps to handling an abusive customer, let's take a look at how you put it all together on a phone call. 

Pay close attention to how the customer service rep deals with the abusive customer. Look for how the customer service representative assesses, reassures, empathizes, changes focus, solves, aborts, and follows up.

- Thank you for calling ACME Sign Company. My name is Stephanie, what's your name? - Jim. - Hi Jim, how can I help you? 
- You can get me my sign that you promised me for my booth. The convention starts tomorrow. 
- I apologize. I'm here now, and I promise to take excellent care of you. Can you give me your order number, and tell me a little bit about what happened? 
- The order number is 067432. I ordered a sign for my convention booth from you guys, you promised I'd get it, I don't have it. Now your stupid shipping website says I'm not going to get it today. I need to have it today, so get me my sign. 
- I apologize for that. Please forgive me. 

I know how frustrating this can be. I've expected products on a certain date and didn't get them, and it was a real bummer, but my goal is to make sure that you leave this conversation happy, so I will do whatever I can to remedy the situation for you ASAP. Let me have a look at your order now. 
- You know, your company screwed up. So, fix it. 
- Absolutely, I'm looking at your account now. While I'm working on this for you, how's the weather out in California? I hear it's getting warm. 
- It's hot. Where's my sign? 
Okay Mr. Smith, here's what I found out. Your product is on the three-day delivery. It shows that it should be there tomorrow before noon. It's in route now. 
- Are you a moron? I said the convention starts tomorrow. 
- I can overnight another sign to you and ship it directly to your convention. It will be there before noon if I ship it now. 
- Okay, you're just an absolute idiot. Did you not hear me? 
- I know you're frustrated Mr. Smith, but my goal is to do whatever I can to make sure that you leave happy. You and your business are very important to us. 

In order to do that, you and I need to be respectful of each other in this conversation. Otherwise I will need to hang up. 
- Okay. How about you get in your car and drive the sign over to me right now? 
- I wish I could, but what I can do is offer you a full refund and you can return or keep the sign once you get it. 
- I'm going to come down there and show you what happens when you screw over your customers. 
- Mr. Smith, I apologize for what you're going through right now. At this time, it doesn't look like you and I can have a respectable conversation. So please call us back at a different time. Thank you. Dear Mr. Smith, we sincerely apologize for the delay in getting you your product. We know how frustrating that situation must have been for you. You are very important to us. Our goal is to take excellent care of you so that you leave our interactions happy. 

Please accept our apologies and this coupon for free overnight delivery for your next order. I have already refunded your purchase price, and please keep the product on us. Thank you for being the best part of our business. Sincerely, Stephanie, ACME Online Company Customer Service Rep. 

- Were you able to pick out the seven steps as the customer service representative went through them? Let's take a look. First, Stephanie assessed Jim's situation. She asked, "Hi Jim, how can I help you?" She also asked, "Can you give me your order number and tell me a little bit about what happened?" Stephanie was able to establish the exact problem. Next, Stephanie reassured the customer that she was there to take care of him. She said, "I apologize. I'm here now, and I promise to take excellent care of you." Then Stephanie showed Jim empathy by saying, "I know how frustrating that can be. I've expected products on a certain date, and didn't receive them, and it was a real bummer." 

She also did her best to change Jim's focus by asking him how the weather was in California. She came up with a couple of different solutions for the customer as well. She offered to overnight the sign to his convention, give him a full refund, and let him keep the sign free of charge. She was committed to solving Jim's problem. Once it was clear that the customer was going to continue to be abusive with her, Stephanie decided to abort the transaction. Once Jim had a chance to calm down, Stephanie sent a follow-up email offering Jim extraordinary value. A coupon for free overnight shipping, a full refund, and the sign he had ordered, he gets to keep for free. 

Stephanie clearly and methodically went through the seven steps. Practice the steps, and you'll see how it gets easier and easier to apply. 

Using empathy to show you care
 
Selecting transcript lines in this section will navigate to timestamp in the video

- I fly a lot, doing customer service trainings for companies around the country. I had just boarded a flight and was sitting at the gate getting ready to depart. Over the loud speaker, a flight attendant announced that if you are boarding in one of the later groups, you would not be able to board with your carry on bag, not a good sign. Then I hear some commotion coming from behind me. A woman had boarded with her carry on, and was told she'd have to check it. She was not happy. In fact, she started yelling at the flight attendants, and they started yelling back at her, really not a good sign. Finally, they all calmed down and they took her bag from her and went to check it. When we were about to leave the gate, I hear another commotion coming from behind me. I turned around to see the same woman yelling and screaming at the flight attendants. This time was over the issue of her phone. One of the flight attendants broke off, and exited the plane. The irate passenger was still yelling and screaming at the flight attendants. All of a sudden the flight attendant reappeared walking down the aisle, but this time with security. 

They grabbed the irate woman and forcibly remove her from the plane. Ouch. She was still screaming profanities at the crew, a really bad sign. I don't know what happened to the passenger at the end of all that, but I asked myself, "Could the flight attendants have reacted differently to this situation, and avoided the conflict: by showing empathy for their customer, kindness or caring?" I believe they could have. Instead, they treated their customer like a second class citizen. And the end result was terrible. Empathy is putting yourself in someone else's shoes, and making an attempt to feel how they feel in that moment. Empathy is a natural instate that we all have as humans. The flight attendants in this instance showed zero empathy for the passenger. 

You need to think about how the customer feels, and then let them see that you care, and that they're important. Often in business or at work, we suppress showing empathy because society has put a stigma on empathy as being weak or vulnerable. The truth is, you cannot effectively deescalate an abusive customer and still deliver world-class service without first showing empathy. A great way to relate to a customer and show empathy is to share with them a similar story that happened to you, or another customer in their situation. Share with them how you felt. Share with them that you sympathize with what they're going through. 

That will help the customer feel understood and cared for. Then tell them how the issue was resolved, and how you found the truth of the matter. A great way to phrase this is by saying, "I went through a similar situation. I felt very frustrated. I used to think X, but then I found Y to be true." 

This is a subtle way to show your customer that they may have been mistaken in their thinking. When you focus on making your customers happy, regardless of what's happening around you, magic can happen. And suddenly, the abusive customer becomes apologetic and calm. When that happens, you know you're doing this right. 

What if the customer continues to be abusive? You need to reassess the situation, and make sure that you keep yourself, and anyone else around you safe. 
